---
title: pip
layout: post
category: python
author: 夏泽民
---
$pip install requests
-bash: pip: command not found

$sudo easy_install pip

WARNING: Improper use of the sudo command could lead to data loss
or the deletion of important system files. Please double-check your
typing when using sudo. Type "man sudo" for more information.

To proceed, enter your password, or type Ctrl-C to abort.

Password:
Searching for pip
Best match: pip 9.0.1
Processing pip-9.0.1-py2.7.egg
pip 9.0.1 is already the active version in easy-install.pth
Installing pip script to /usr/local/bin
Installing pip2.7 script to /usr/local/bin
Installing pip2 script to /usr/local/bin

Using /Library/Python/2.7/site-packages/pip-9.0.1-py2.7.egg
Processing dependencies for pip
Finished processing dependencies for pip

$pip install requests
Collecting requests
  Could not fetch URL https://pypi.python.org/simple/requests/: There was a problem confirming the ssl certificate: [SSL: TLSV1_ALERT_PROTOCOL_VERSION] tlsv1 alert protocol version (_ssl.c:590) - skipping
  Could not find a version that satisfies the requirement requests (from versions: )
No matching distribution found for requests

$ python -m pip install --upgrade pip
Collecting pip
  Downloading https://files.pythonhosted.org/packages/36/74/38c2410d688ac7b48afa07d413674afc1f903c1c1f854de51dc8eb2367a5/pip-20.2-py2.py3-none-any.whl (1.5MB)
    100% |████████████████████████████████| 1.5MB 824kB/s
Installing collected packages: pip
  Found existing installation: pip 9.0.1
    Uninstalling pip-9.0.1:
      Successfully uninstalled pip-9.0.1
Successfully installed pip-20.2

$pip install requests
Collecting requests
  Could not fetch URL https://pypi.python.org/simple/requests/: There was a problem confirming the ssl certificate: [SSL: TLSV1_ALERT_PROTOCOL_VERSION] tlsv1 alert protocol version (_ssl.c:590) - skipping
  Could not find a version that satisfies the requirement requests (from versions: )
No matching distribution found for requests
<!-- more -->
$sudo  pip install -i https://pypi.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/simple requests
Password:
The directory '/Users/didi/Library/Caches/pip/http' or its parent directory is not owned by the current user and the cache has been disabled. Please check the permissions and owner of that directory. If executing pip with sudo, you may want sudo's -H flag.
The directory '/Users/didi/Library/Caches/pip' or its parent directory is not owned by the current user and caching wheels has been disabled. check the permissions and owner of that directory. If executing pip with sudo, you may want sudo's -H flag.
Collecting requests
  Downloading https://pypi.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/packages/45/1e/0c169c6a5381e241ba7404532c16a21d86ab872c9bed8bdcd4c423954103/requests-2.24.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl (61kB)
    100% |████████████████████████████████| 71kB 1.3MB/s
Collecting urllib3!=1.25.0,!=1.25.1,<1.26,>=1.21.1 (from requests)
  Downloading https://pypi.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/packages/9f/f0/a391d1463ebb1b233795cabfc0ef38d3db4442339de68f847026199e69d7/urllib3-1.25.10-py2.py3-none-any.whl (127kB)
    100% |████████████████████████████████| 133kB 830kB/s
Collecting idna<3,>=2.5 (from requests)
  Downloading https://pypi.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/packages/a2/38/928ddce2273eaa564f6f50de919327bf3a00f091b5baba8dfa9460f3a8a8/idna-2.10-py2.py3-none-any.whl (58kB)
    100% |████████████████████████████████| 61kB 1.1MB/s
Collecting certifi>=2017.4.17 (from requests)
  Downloading https://pypi.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/packages/5e/c4/6c4fe722df5343c33226f0b4e0bb042e4dc13483228b4718baf286f86d87/certifi-2020.6.20-py2.py3-none-any.whl (156kB)
    100% |████████████████████████████████| 163kB 885kB/s
Collecting chardet<4,>=3.0.2 (from requests)
  Downloading https://pypi.tuna.tsinghua.edu.cn/packages/bc/a9/01ffebfb562e4274b6487b4bb1ddec7ca55ec7510b22e4c51f14098443b8/chardet-3.0.4-py2.py3-none-any.whl (133kB)
    100% |████████████████████████████████| 143kB 929kB/s
Installing collected packages: urllib3, idna, certifi, chardet, requests
Successfully installed certifi-2020.6.20 chardet-3.0.4 idna-2.10 requests-2.24.0 urllib3-1.25.10


